# Storage

File storage is done on a Simple Storage System (i.e. S3), with file
versioning enabled. All configurations for connecting to the
storage, including the name of the bucket used, are defined in the
file `/conf/env.app`.


## Prefixes (directories)

The used prefixes (which can be conceptually considered as
directories) on S3 for users files storage, are the following:

<table border="2" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="6" rules="groups" frame="hsides">


<colgroup>
<col  class="org-left" />

<col  class="org-left" />

<col  class="org-left" />

<col  class="org-left" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr>
<th scope="col" class="org-left">Prefix</th>
<th scope="col" class="org-left">Contents</th>
<th scope="col" class="org-left">File names</th>
<th scope="col" class="org-left">Metadata</th>
</tr>
</thead>

<tbody>
<tr>
<td class="org-left">`/projects/<uuid:projectid>/files/`</td>
<td class="org-left">The files of the QFieldCloud project, uploaded by the user</td>
<td class="org-left">Actual file name including the relative path (e.g. `foo/bar/project.qgs`)</td>
<td class="org-left">`Sha256sum` containing the sha256 hashcode of the file</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-left">`/projects/<uuid:projectid>/deltas/`</td>
<td class="org-left">The deltafiles with the changes to the data, uploaded by QField</td>
<td class="org-left">The file name is the the deltafile id's UUID code</td>
<td class="org-left">`Sha256sum` containing the sha256 hashcode of the file, `Status` containing the status of the deltafile (e.g. `APPLIED_WITH_CONFLICTS`)</td>
</tr>


<tr>
<td class="org-left">`/projects/<uuid:projectid>/export/`</td>
<td class="org-left">The files generated by QFieldSync on the server, that are to be downloaded by QField</td>
<td class="org-left">Actual file name including the relative path (e.g. `foo/bar/project.qgs`)</td>
<td class="org-left">`Sha256sum` containing the sha256 hashcode of the file</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>


## APIs

Here is a rough description of how APIs interact with storage.

### `/files/` endpoints (aka QGIS API)

The `/files/` endpoints, work directly with files saved with the
`/projects/<uuid:projectid>/files/` prefix, so, by uploading a
file, the file is stored as is in the storage. The endpoints to
list, download and delete a file, work directly with the content
of the storage.


### `/qfield-files/` endpoints (aka QField API)

The `/qfield-files/` endpoints, work asynchronously. The endpoint
`GET /qfield-files/{projectid}/`, will run a docker container with
QGIS and QFieldSync that will prepare a project export ready to be
used on QField. The generated files are saved with the prefix
`/projects/<uuid:projectid>/export/` that is used by the endpoints
to list and download files for qfield.


### `/deltas/` endpoints

The `/deltas/` endpoints, work asynchronously. The endpoint `POST
    /deltas/{projectid}/`, will run a docker container with QGIS and
the `apply-deltas` script that will apply the deltafile to the
original datasource. Modified files (e.g. file-based datasource
contained in the QFieldCloud project) are updated into original
position (`/projects/<uuid:projectid>/files/` prefix). The status
of the `apply-deltas` script is also stored as metadata of the
deltafile itself.

